recording here. So yes, this beginning part if you can just tell us your name and where you were
born in English and in your mother language as well if that's okay. Just that part only.
My name is Shamim Hussain and I was born in Peshawar, Pakistan.
Can you tell us about that era that you grew up on as well then? What was like, what your childhood was like?
My childhood was quite privileged but very restrictive. We had quite a lot of
distinctions on us as female because the society and culture I came from is very male and very
different worlds. There are different rules for them and all that. I had a big family, my father and my mothers.
But the thing which prevailed in our family was the education. There was no difference between girls or boys for the education.
I was raised in a very poor family. I was raised in a very poor family. I was raised in a very poor family.
The thing which prevailed in our family was the education. There was no difference between girls or boys for the education.
There was no difference between girls or boys for the education.
So, till the age of seven, I went to a local school wherever my father was appointed. He was a government officer.
After that, when he went to bigger cities, he was appointed in large cities like Shahwar, Haripur, and so on.
So then I went to a mission school. So education was for all brothers and sisters.
The only thing is we were never allowed to go to friends' houses. We were not allowed to go for sleepovers.
Any friends who came to our homes came with their mothers. Same with us. If we wanted to visit the fam's house, we had to go with the elders.
We had our own transport, so that wasn't a problem.
We were allowed to play all games, but within the ladies' side area, girls' schools, we were not allowed to go and mix up with the boys or something at the age of nine even.
So I played football, sorry, netball. I played tennis. I played hockey. I was involved in all sorts of athletics in my childhood.
At that time, I did not recognize the benefit of them. It was just to prove myself and be in the front. I was doing it.
Then my father was transferred every 18 months from one station to another station. So every 18 months, I went to a new school.
So I experienced quite a lot of different cultures in Pakistan, different societies, different status of people, till I did my medical education.
That is year 10. After that, I went to college. Then I got sent to a hostel. Two years of college I did with science.
Naturally, I was not a brilliant student. I just met your average upper second class and lower first class.
They never had the...because I was more involved in extra-curricular activities, debates and dramas and all that.
Then I went to university to do my degree with science, full science. Besides this, I was also...because part of my degree in university,
we were assigned to different places to do some social work training. It was a new subject introduced in the degrees and it was compulsory to do it.
Otherwise, the science degrees were not allocated to us. So I went and did it in the hospital, the leading hospital.
Intentionally, I wanted to be a doctor initially, but my grades never came to that level. So I could have gone to reserve seats, but my father said,
No, work hard. If you come in the competition, if you have got good grades, you go. You are not going on any reserve seat.
So I then did my BSc. That's why I went to do my degree in university instead of medical school.
So in the hospital, I came across people, illnesses, underprivileged people. I came across ladies who...at that time, I realized that ladies have got restrictions to express themselves
and all that in certain areas and all that. Privileges which are not given to the ladies. I started thinking about others.
So when I went to university to do my final degree, MA degree, 65-Wall broke in between Pakistan and India.
So because I had done the social work in the hospital, so I went to CMH, Combined Military Hospital, to do work over there as voluntary worker.
When the war ended, I saw an advertisement in a paper. I was sitting in the library doing something, a little advertisement, asking for...
Pakistan Navy was asking for welfare officers, a lady welfare officer, and they were conducting interviews all over Pakistan.
I just applied for it without asking my father or mother. I just applied because I knew who was going to come to Peshawar to interview me
because we were supposed to be a very backward area as far as Punjab is concerned. Mainly everything was done in Punjab and Karachi.
So I received an interview letter asking me to come to Lahore for the interview. That I couldn't do on my own.
I had to ask my mother and my father. My father at that time was at a very senior post and he was away from home.
So my mother said, no way, you're not going anywhere. Just finish your degree and go and join the college and teach whatever you want.
Do nothing of the sort. But when I spoke to my father on telephone, then he agreed to it. He told my mother, let her go to have an experience of the interview.
She's never been out of the house. So I went for the interview. And they conducted an interview in East Pakistan, West Pakistan.
There was only one post in the whole of the Navy. And we, people who live in my two-and-a-days, we have got no idea what Navy is.
I was very much aware of military, police, air force, these people, because there were officers in the families and all that. But Navy, I never heard of it.
But with my father's permission, one of my sisters, she accompanied me, we went to Lahore.
That was the first time I ever went out of the house on my own. And no place to, we didn't know where to live even, but we had some family friends with us.
When I went into the office, they were taking my interview, they were sitting people with white uniforms and all gold over there. And they were so big. I really lost it.
I said, my God, where have I come from? Who these people are? I had never seen them before. Big personalities.
Anyway, because I could speak five languages, they were interested more in it and they asked me questions, some about politics, which was just normal education and defense and all that.
And I came home after that. And then I received a letter that I had been selected. I was in the university at that time. And I got to go over medical.
So that breaking that news to my parents, not only my parents, but their extended family, because we were, my father's family was all in Bishrawar. So everyone was our boss.
So then I wrote letter to my father that I was just a few days and I got to go for my medical checkup. And my mother was also with my father at those.
So he said, go ahead. And he did not tell anybody in the family. Not his brothers, his sisters, extended family, which were in position of spuraupami.
So I went for the medical test. Being an athlete, I had faced easy sailing. And then an appointment letter came.
That was very difficult, very difficult to tell anyone. Because, and the reaction was, no, our girls don't go out. They don't go out to the other cities to do the chores.
Because we had educated ladies. One of my aunties was in medicine, but they were there in the house. And she did her medicine in a female medical school.
And she was looking after the ladies. I was going to different world, all men. I was only woman in that, going there. And that was at the age of 20.
So, but I said, all right, I'm going. I told my uncle, I want to go there and see what it is. If I can't do it, it's my probationary period. I'll come back.
And God bless him, he agreed to it. The ladies were deadly against me. So I went to Karachi, that's south of Pakistan.
And then I served 13 years on my own in Pakistan, maybe. So I tried my best to get some other ladies in the, at that time, if we can recruit ladies in different departments and all that.
They were not listening to anything. Then there was a war broke out again in between Pakistan and India. It was a 1971 war, which I went through. It was a very difficult period.
I saw a lot of destruction over there and destruction, families disabled, young sailors and officers being blown up in the boats and all that.
My own brother-in-law, who is now my brother-in-law, he was captured in East Pakistan and he was reported missing.
So I was looking after the families and feeling myself all the pains of the aftermath of the war.
That was the day I decided that war is not for anyone. It has to be, there has to be something else. We should educate ourselves to be more politically aware and political in Washington.
But after 13 years, then I left in the 80s. And I got married then. When I left, there was no lady in the Navy.
But after that, I don't know, my brother-in-law, when his badge came into the power, because he retired as admiral, so then they introduced ladies in education, in engineering, medicines they had.
But other technical sides of that, now, mashallah, there are quite a lot of ladies in the Pakistan Navy.
So I got married and came to the UK then. And my husband was a politician over here. He was the first ever Muslim mayor in this country, for a, Leonard Barrow Brent, Muslim-Asian.
So he was a little bit in a high-privileged position when I came. And I came from a military background, nothing to do with politics.
So that was another readjustment of my life. I've been readjusting my life all my life. So I worked with him. We were in London before.
Then when he retired, we came to Newport to live over there. Newport was very quiet, calm, and people were very, helping was laid back people.
Whereas London was very hectic. So over here we tried to work because he was a Labour candidate, a member, so we worked with the Labour Party.
But he did not pick up politics over here. He wanted to retire. Then I wanted to work, so I went to work for the first time, because of my languages and my educational background, I worked for them for a few years.
Then my husband became very ill. He started to have Alzheimer's, so he got very ill for 15 years. So I did not do anything after that. I was looking after my soul, the care of him.
So he passed away in 2014. After that, then I joined Asia Life to be with them. And it's a very diverse group. I learnt a lot from them, because I wasn't aware of how much underprivileged ladies are and what the females have to go through when they came to this country.
I had the advantage of language. I had the advantage of my experience of my job as in the Navy. So I did not face those problems which these other ladies face. So I joined the group to help wherever I can.
Then I lost sight in my... I had developed a macular hole in my eyes and lost sight. Then sight comreat people helped me. I went through operations and all that. When my sight was frozen, only in one eye. I got sight, treating sight only in one eye.
So that affected my writing, my vocabulary, all those things which were in a way my strength. I lost all of them because I didn't have any confidence.
Then on my request, a group was created over there in Newport that was Sight Life. So I became a trainer of it and I'm running there to work with my other friends, chair and all this.
So that gave me an opportunity to meet people who have lost sight and who don't get any help. Nobody is aware of it that the help is around, available or something.
Also sometimes people think it's a stigma to be called blind or something like that. I myself didn't know about it. That's why I lost sight in my right eye because I just didn't know about it.
I didn't know about the macular hole or if there was anything to do with it. Help is available for us. Later on I came to...
Now I'm a member of Eyes Alive. I've been translating for anyone who asks me. Anyone from English to Urdu and also interpreting for Punjabi, Pashto, all these languages I know.
Sight Life, I'm a member of it and I hope that I can help people. That's my life. Is it enough?
Wow! Is it enough? Beyond enough. I think it's really incredible to hear that journey.
From the moment that you mentioned how you were involved in all of these sports, to be there and to be present, I think that was also reflected in what started happening for your journey, for your career and things that you were passionate about and the things that you ended up going into.
It was amazing to see all those reflections. I think you opened so many doors as well. From what you were talking about, it felt like you were opening various doors that had never been opened before and never been allowed to open, so to speak.
Then it allowed others to walk through that door. There were so many things I was going to ask, but each time that you were sharing your story, you were answering it. I was just thinking about the ages as well, like how old you were when you went to Lahore for the first time as well.
You said that you were 13 years in that post. What happened with university? I know that was the biggest friction, why people wanted you to stay in university because you were supposed to be in university and then you ended up going into this. What did that feel like for you as well?
Actually, a little bit I wanted to talk about my father because he was involved in the jail department. That was for young offenders' jails. At that time I did not understand, but he always insisted upon those boys to go to school in the jail, do their education and also a professional training.
He arranged for them. I can safely say that he was the only person who did it. He started it and kept it wherever he went, whichever post he went, he did it.
He used to give them incentives when they used to go for their tests or exams. We were living in a big bungalow, they used to come and he used to ask my mother when they come, give them a cup of tea and food because they were going to have another paper tomorrow.
That is called social work, which I came to know when I was in university. At that time, when I was going through at the age of nine, I did not have any clue what it is. In his tenure, there were five people who did their masters from university, two doctors.
Prisoners came out as two doctors. For that, he had to send guards to their college in disguised and white clothes and all that. The same money which he was getting to run the jail, he was managing it for that.
That was the idea here. One should always have the underprivileged, not only the other, but those who might have lost the opportunity because of the circumstances.
That is why I joined Navy as a welfare officer. Also, they gave me my degree, I did social work in the hospital. Social work was a new term for us. What did it mean? What was the philosophy? What was the ethics? I had no idea. That I learned through my own job.
Yes, when I went to Lahore, I was 20 years old. Before that, I had never traveled anywhere. With family, yes. With family, we were going, but I had never traveled. Nobody thought of it. My father, where we come from, what we are doing, he would allow me and my sister to go to Lahore on our own.
Because I went to college and university, it opened doors for the other girls. Those families which were trying to keep their daughters in school, do the school and get them married, because they were girls' schools, girls' colleges, they allowed their daughters to go.
After me, I'm not very much qualified, but after me, the girls are qualified. My God! One of my sisters, she just retired as a head of social services, director of social services in Norway. She was the first woman, non-Norwegian lady, she achieved that.
She's gone to Amfield and all that. Another sister is a gynecologist, another school is a school teacher. That's my coming out and doing the thing, opened the doors for them. We did not give any importance to the boys because they were getting everything.
Our home was where they were not privileged. They had to do their things themselves and they had to prove themselves that yes, whatever is spent on them, they are worth it. In fact, girls are in more privileged positions in my family than the boys.
They went for army service, air force service and all that. That's our limit. But we girls accept. So that's our privilege. But it's because my father's positive thinking, his nature and my mother's cooperation with him.
Because my mother used to do the family things, she never bothered him. He was always doing his job properly and doing good for the others. That's one part of the family which made me my personality.
I was a tomboyish because I had two younger brothers and they were my friends. Whenever they got into mischief, they used to say, we didn't do ourself. Our father told us to do it.
So I was the person who was always punished for that, for what they were doing. But I think that was a growing up period where we learnt a lot.
So as far as you ask, that was 20 years of age when I went to. I went in May for the interview and in June I joined the Navy. It was March when I went for the interview and in June I got the letter to join the Navy.
So in August I reported at that time when the war was over and things were based accordingly. So it was difficult working with men because they were not used to working with a girl or woman, a single woman who comes from the Northwest, from the Borka.
After that, when I joined the Navy, I started wearing my coat or uniform. Before that I was wearing Borka. That covered my face. I learnt driving in that. For me, it should have been very difficult.
When you feel that you are clad in Borka, you are protected. When you just take it off and you are wearing just coat, you feel you are not protected. That is the feeling.
But going into naval headquarters was the biggest, biggest step for me to go there. And you see everybody walking about in a very authoritative way. They are very fit and all that. And their uniform is very overpowering, especially the uniform officers.
Difficult. It was adjusting over there and then not feeling that you are not equal to them because they were trained all over the world. They were experienced people.
And then trying to sort out the problems which they did not want to expose, family problems. None of the officers, sailors, wanted to know anyone that they have got family problems.
When the ships were out, I used to look after the children's education, their health, their accommodation. I used to provide them. And then I started industrial schools in the colonies.
At that time it was a little one room. They used to come and do something and they go away. When my sister became in charge of it, it is a big industrial home now.
And they export to all over the world. And my picture is still there.
Just to kind of bring it all in, why is that important for the future generation, for the next generation to be exposed to certain traditions, to be exposed to education, to be exposed to wisdom? Why is that a real, real strong anchor for them going forward?
Because A, I was thinking we were capable of doing things. Any woman is capable of doing things provided she is given the right education and right atmosphere.
B, because Pakistan has got five provinces, every province has got their own culture. Northwest Frontier Province is just, they are called racial, they can fight, they can go anywhere, but their ladies should stay home.
And luckily I was in Peshawar, but I was in the villages, ladies were not allowed to go for education or something. They were educated at home, but they were not exposed like me to anything.
And people from Peshawar, Peshawar was a city. So all the education was in Punjab, the centre of Pakistan. Because that was a flat area and there were five rivers running around and they had everything, everything that God can give to anyone at that land.
Education was there, agriculture was there, business was there, even government was there. So they were privileged to, I don't say that I've done only, there are many other ladies like me who've done it.
And I very proudly can say that two years ago the first female general in Pakistan, maybe retired, she's from our area. First female. At that time there were three, and there was none of them, three female generals in any army in all of the world three years ago.
So that is it. These girls were born after me when I left it. And my other friends and my colleagues who did, some of them did medicine with me. Some of them, we were not allowed to go for flying.
Now my nieces, two daughters are pilots and there are quite a lot of them, and engineers and doctors, there are quite a lot of them. So I think it was important to enlighten the ladies that they've got the capacity.
Within their own limits they can do it. They don't have to break the balls or something. If a mother is educated and she knows what is going on in the world, she can educate her children properly. She can bring up her children. That was more important for me.
So I don't know whether I've answered your question or not.
Yes you have, yes you have. Thank you, thank you very much for your story. Thank you for everything that you've just shared.
I don't know what I've done, but I wasn't ready. Because there were no questions.
No, no, no. You answered every single one of them anyway and your story really did that. So thank you, thank you very much.
Thanks for your time. Thank you very much.